Revamp TERMINOLOGY.md (#2522)
ROCm/composable_kernel: TERMINOLOGY.md

- [Pipeline](#pipeline)
- [Policy](#policy)
- [Problem](#problem)
- [Processing Units](#processing-units)
- [Reference Kernel](#reference-kernel)
- [Regression Test](#regression-test)
- [SGPR (Scalar General Purpose Register)](#sgpr-scalar-general-purpose-register)
- [Shared Memory / LDS (Local Data Share)](#shared-memory--lds-local-data-share)
- [SIMT / SIMD](#simt--simd)
- [Smoke Test](#smoke-test)
- [Sparse Tensor](#sparse-tensor)
- [Split-K GEMM](#split-k-gemm)
- [Store Tile](#store-tile)
- [Thread / Work-item](#thread--work-item)
- [Thread Block / Work Group](#thread-block--work-group)
- [Vanilla GEMM](#vanilla-gemm)
- [Tile](#tile)
- [Tile Distribution](#tile-distribution)
- [Tile Partitioner](#tile-partitioner)
- [Tile Programming API](#tile-programming-api)
- [Tile Window](#tile-window)
- [User Customized Tile Pipeline](#user-customized-tile-pipeline)
- [User Customized Tile Pipeline Optimization](#user-customized-tile-pipeline-optimization)
- [Vector](#vector)
- [VGPR (Vector General Purpose Register)](#vgpr-vector-general-purpose-register)
- [Warp / Wavefront](#warp--wavefront)
- [Wave Tile](#wave-tile)
- [XDL Instructions](#xdl-instructions)

---

> ## 1. Hardware and Memory Hierarchy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Hardware and Memory
```

### Processing Units

> The GPU is composed of multiple hardware units (SMs on NVIDIA, CUs on AMD), each containing many cores that execute threads in parallel. These units manage shared resources and coordinate execution at scale.

Reviewer: So here the terms SM and CU are used without spelling out what they are. In general -- and since this page could be pulled into the docs -- you define the acronym the first time you use it eg, "compute units (CU)...". 

And there should be a link from CU and SM to their entries.

The term "executes" should be avoided as much as possible. (like that second execution? I can't think of how to replace it right now. I'll think about it.

```suggestion
The GPU is composed of multiple hardware units (SMs on NVIDIA, CUs on AMD) that contain multiple cores that run threads in parallel. These units manage shared resources and coordinate execution at scale.
```

Author: resolved.

### Matrix Core

> Specialized GPU units that accelerate matrix operations for AI and deep learning tasks.

Reviewer: Matrix core is singular but it's described as "units" plural. This needs to be clarified a bit.

Author: resolved.

### Compute Unit (CU)

> A parallel vector processor in a GPU with multiple ALUs, where all waves in a workgroup run on the same CU.

Reviewer: Need to define/link to waves and ALU.

The sentence should also be changed so that the CU is the subject:

```suggestion
A parallel vector processor in a GPU with multiple ALUs.  Each compute unit will run all the waves in a workgroup.
```

Author: resolved

> ### MFMA (Matrix Fused Multiply-Add)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Matrix Fused Multiply-Add (MFMA)
```

Author: resolved

> AMD's matrix core instruction for efficient GEMM operations. CK optimizes for MFMA usage.

Reviewer: This is a bit ambiguous. On the one hand, it's an instruction for efficient GEMM operations, which implies it's already optimized; on the other, CK is optimizing for it

Author: You're correct. fixed to "CK optimizes kernel designs to maximize MFMA utilization and performance"

> ### Registers

Reviewer: Plural or singular?

Author: plural. In CK, Registers are referred as a collection and almost never as an individual unit.

> The fastest memory tier, registers are private to each thread/work-item and used for storing temporary variables during computation. AMD distinguishes between vector (VGPR) and scalar (SGPR) registers, while NVIDIA uses a unified register file.

Reviewer: Are registers private memory? There should be a link to VGPR etc.

```suggestion
Registers are private memory [blocks? areas? entities?] for each thread or work-item. Registers are used to store temporary variables during computation. AMD distinguishes between vector (VGPR) and scalar (SGPR) registers, while NVIDIA uses a unified register file. Registers are the fastest memory tier.
```

Author: Yes, registers are private because data in a register cannot be access by a thread that does not own that register.

> ### VGPR (Vector General Purpose Register)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Vector General Purpose Register (VGPR)
```

> Per-thread registers that store individual thread data within a wave. Each thread has its own set of VGPRs for private variables and calculations.

Reviewer: So the mapping of VGPRs is one thread to many VGPRs?

Author: Yes, one thread owns multiple VGPRs.

### Scalar General Purpose Register (SGPR)

> Wave-level registers shared by all threads in a wave. Used for constants, addresses, and control flow that are common across the entire wave.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wave-level registers shared by all threads in a wave. Used for constants, addresses, and control flow common across the entire wave.
```

> ### Shared Memory / LDS (Local Data Share)

Reviewer: Is this different names for the same thing?

```suggestion
### Shared Memory / Local Data Share (LDS)
```

> High-bandwidth, low-latency on-chip memory accessible to all threads within a block (CUDA) or work group (ROCm). It enables fast data sharing and synchronization, but is limited in capacity and must be managed to avoid bank conflicts.

Reviewer: Need a link to bank conflict.

And while this is ROCm documentation and everyone knows CUDA, it probably wouldn't be a bad idea to define them somewhere and link to them (nice to have).

### LDS Banks

> Memory organization where consecutive addresses are distributed across multiple memory banks for parallel access. Prevents memory access conflicts (bank conflicts) and improves bandwidth.

Reviewer: I can't tell if Memory Banks are defined here but it should be linked to. As well as bank conflicts.

Author: Done

### Global Memory

> The main device memory accessible by all threads, offering high capacity but higher latency than shared memory. Efficient global memory access patterns are critical for high performance.

Reviewer: So I understand the last line and why it's there, but it feels out of place. Maybe having a Global Memory Access Pattern entry would be better?

Author: removed

### Pinned Memory
Host memory that is page-locked to accelerate transfers between CPU and GPU, reducing overhead for large data movements.

### Dense Tensor
A tensor in which most elements are nonzero, typically stored in a contiguous block of memory.

### Sparse Tensor
A tensor in which most elements are zero, allowing for memory and computation optimizations by storing only nonzero values and their indices.

### Host
CPU and main memory system that manages GPU execution. Launches kernels, transfers data, and coordinates overall computation.

### Device
GPU hardware that executes parallel kernels. Contains compute units, memory hierarchy, and specialized accelerators.

---

> ## 2. Execution Model

Reviewer: If you can come up with a different word, that would be good. "Run model" doesn't feel right...

Author: GPU Programming Model

### Thread / Work-item

> The smallest unit of parallel execution, each running an independent instruction stream on a single data element. Threads are grouped for efficient scheduling and resource sharing.

Reviewer: I would specify which term is from NVIDIA and which is from AMD.

The thread group line at the end feels out of place. Maybe say that threads are grouped into warps (nvidia) and wavefronts (amd) for efficiency, and then link to the entry for warp/wavefrront.

### Warp / Wavefront

> A group of threads that execute instructions in lockstep, forming the SIMD group. Divergence within these groups can impact performance due to serialization.

Reviewer: Same as above: specify which is nvidia and which is amd.

Link to the SIMD definition.

change "execute" to "run".

And again the last line feels out of place. I think that doesn't belong in a glossary of terms but more in a concept or reference document.

Author: resolved

### Thread Block / Work Group

> A collection of threads/work-items that can synchronize and share memory. Blocks/groups are scheduled independently and mapped to hardware units for execution.

Reviewer: Again need to specify the nvidia/amd divide. 

So the way I understand, it's not the threads that get run, but they run operations on items in parallel. So maybe:

```suggestion
A collection of threads/work-items that can synchronize and share memory. The computations on blocks/groups are scheduled independently and mapped to (separate?) hardware units when they're run.
```

Author: resolved. This is not about individual threads so ignoring "So the way I understand, it's not the threads that get run, but they run operations on items in parallel. So maybe:"

### Grid
The complete collection of all work groups (thread blocks) that execute a kernel. A grid spans the entire computational domain and is organized in 1D, 2D, or 3D dimensions. Each work group within the grid operates independently and can be scheduled on different compute units, enabling massive parallel execution across the entire GPU.

### Block Size
Number of work-items/threads in a compute unit (CU). Determines work group size and memory usage.

> ### SIMT / SIMD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single-Instruction, Multi-Thread (SIMT) / Single-Instruction, Multi-Data (SIMD)
```

SIMT (Single-Instruction, Multi-Thread) allows threads in a warp to diverge, while SIMD (Single-Instruction, Multi-Data) enforces strict lockstep execution within wavefronts. These models define how parallelism is expressed and managed on different architectures.

### Occupancy

> The ratio of active warps/wavefronts to the maximum supported by a hardware unit, influencing the ability to hide memory latency and maximize throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ratio of active warps/wavefronts to the maximum number of warps/wavefronts supported by a hardware unit. Affects the ability to hide memory latency and maximize throughput.
```

---

## 3. Programming Model and Kernel Structure

### Kernel

> A function executed on the GPU, typically written in HIP or CUDA, that performs parallel computations over input data. Kernels are launched with specific grid and block dimensions to map computation to hardware. In CK, kernels are composed from pipelines and require a pipeline, tile partitioner, and epilogue component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function typically written in HIP or CUDA, that is run on GPU and performs parallel computations over input data. Kernels are launched with specific grid and block dimensions to map computation to hardware. In CK, kernels are composed from pipelines and require a pipeline, tile partitioner, and epilogue component.
```

### Pipeline

> CK abstraction that defines computation flow. Composed of problem (what to compute) and policy (how to move data around) components. Used to define the overall kernel traits, e.g., input/output (IO) tensor data type, layout, workgroup-level tile shapes, and other global flags, e.g., cross-wave scheduler, transposed written, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CK abstraction that defines computation flow. A pipeline is composed of a problem (what to compute) components and a policy (how to move data around) component. Used to define the overall kernel traits, e.g., input/output (IO) tensor data type, layout, workgroup-level tile shapes, and other global flags, e.g., cross-wave scheduler, transposed written, etc.
```

Is the pipeline used to define the kernel traits, or are the problem and policy used to define the kernel traits? It's unclear. Also links to problem and policy are needed.

---

## 3. Kernel Structure

### Kernel
A function executed on the GPU, typically written in [HIP](#hip) or [CUDA](#cuda), that performs parallel computations over input data. Kernels are launched with specific grid and block dimensions to map computation to hardware. In CK, kernels are composed from pipelines and require a pipeline, tile partitioner, and epilogue component.

### Pipeline
CK abstraction that defines computation flow. Composed of problem (what to compute) and policy (how to move data around) components. Used to define the overall kernel traits, e.g., input/output (IO) tensor data type, layout, workgroup-level tile shapes, and other global flags, e.g., cross-wave scheduler, transposed written, etc.

### Tile Partitioner
Defines constants used to map the problem size to the GPU hierarchy. Given the problem size with M, N, K, the TilePartitioner defines:
- The workgroup-level GEMM size kM, kN, kK
- The GridSize along x, y dimension is determined by dividing the problem size M, N into chunks of block-size kM and kN, respectively

> - The K dimension size is used to determine the number of iterations that a single workgroup has to do in order to calculate the dot product of a single output element

Reviewer: Because the problem isn't defined with the same granularity, this feels out of place and it also doesn't have context, so it doesn't make sense. I would either simplify this entry or add details to Problem and Policy.

### Problem
Defines what to compute - input/output shapes, data types, and mathematical operations (e.g., GEMM, convolution).

### Policy
Defines memory access patterns and hardware-specific optimizations.

### User Customized Tile Pipeline

> User-defined pipeline that combines custom problem and policy components for specialized computations.

Reviewer: This leaves me wondering if there are standard problems/policies that I need to know about. That needs to be clarified.

Author: This leaves me wondering if there are standard problems/policies: yes there are.
I've added "CK also provides prebuilt pipelines and policies for common operations that can be used as starting points."

### User Customized Tile Pipeline Optimization
Process of tuning tile sizes, memory access patterns, and hardware utilization for specific workloads.

### Tile Programming API
CK's high-level interface for defining tile-based computations with predefined hardware mapping for data load/store.

### Coordinate Transformation Primitives
CK utilities for converting between different coordinate systems (logical, physical, memory layouts).

### Reference Kernel

> A baseline kernel implementation used for correctness and performance comparison. CK has two implementations of reference kernel: one for CPU and one for GPU verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A baseline kernel implementation used to verify correctness and performance. CK has two reference kernel implementations: one for CPU and one for GPU.
```

### Launch Parameters
Configuration values (e.g., grid size, block size) that determine how a kernel is mapped to hardware resources. Proper tuning of these parameters is essential for optimal performance.

---

## 4. Memory Access and Data Layout

### Memory Coalescing

> An optimization where consecutive threads access consecutive memory addresses, allowing a single memory transaction to serve multiple threads. Proper coalescing is vital for achieving peak memory bandwidth.

Reviewer: The first part sounds like a many-to-many mapping, but the second part sounds like a one-to-many mapping. I think it needs a bit more detail (I don't know enough about this to make a suggestion)

Author: The first part sounds like a many-to-many mapping, but the second part sounds like a one-to-many mapping. Correct.

Memory Coalescing is a technique that converts this many to many mapping to one to many mapping. Let us keep this definition. Its pretty standard

### Alignment

> Ensuring data structures are stored at memory addresses that are multiples of a specific value, which improves access efficiency and avoids misaligned accesses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A memory management startegy for efficient memory access where data structures are stored at addresses that are multiples of a specific value.
```

### Bank Conflict
Occurs when multiple threads in a warp/wavefront access different addresses mapping to the same shared memory bank, causing serialization and reduced bandwidth.

### Padding

> The addition of extra elements (often zeros) to tensor edges, used to control output size in convolution and pooling, or to align data for efficient memory access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The addition of extra elements (often zeros) to tensor edges. This is used to control output size in convolution and pooling, or to align data for efficient memory access.
```

### Permute/Transpose
Operations that rearrange the order of tensor axes, often required to match kernel input formats or optimize memory access patterns.

### Host-Device Transfer
The process of moving data between CPU (host) and GPU (device) memory. Host-device transfers can be a performance bottleneck and are optimized using pinned memory and asynchronous operations.

### Stride
The step size to move from one element to the next in a particular dimension of a tensor or matrix. In convolution and pooling, stride determines how far the kernel moves at each step.

### Dilation
The spacing between kernel elements in convolution operations, allowing the receptive field to grow without increasing kernel size.

### Im2Col/Col2Im
Data transformation techniques that convert image data to column format (im2col) for efficient convolution and back (col2im) to reconstruct the original layout.

### Fast Changing Dimension
Innermost dimension that changes fastest in memory layout.

### Outer Dimension
Slower-changing dimension in memory layout.

### Inner Dimension
Faster-changing dimension in memory layout.

---

## 5. Tile-Based Computing and Data Structures

### Tile

> A sub-region of a tensor or matrix processed by a block or thread, used to improve memory locality and enable blocking strategies in kernels. Rectangular data block that represents the unit of computation and memory transfer in CK. Basis for tiled algorithms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sub-region of a tensor or matrix processed by a block or thread. Tiles are used to improve memory locality and enable blocking strategies in kernels. Rectangular data blocks are the unit of computation and memory transfer in CK and the basis for tiled algorithms.
```

### Block Tile
Memory tile processed by a work group (thread block).

### Wave Tile
Sub-tile processed by a single wave within a work group. Represents the granularity of SIMD execution.

### Tile Distribution

> Hierarchical data mapping between work-items to data in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hierarchical data mapping from work-items to data in memory.
```

Operation that transfers data from per-thread registers to LDS/global memory using optimized memory access patterns.

### Descriptor
Metadata structure that defines tile properties, memory layouts, and coordinate transformations for CK operations.

### Input/Problem Shape
Dimensions and data types of input tensors that define the computational problem (e.g., M×K, K×N for GEMM).

### Vector
Smallest data unit processed by individual threads. Typically 4-16 elements depending on data type and hardware.

---

## 6. Kernel Operations and Optimization

### Elementwise
Operations applied independently to each tensor element, such as addition or multiplication. These are highly parallelizable and benefit from efficient memory access.

### Epilogue
The final stage of a kernel or operation, often applying activation functions, bias, or other post-processing steps. Epilogues are critical for integrating kernel outputs into larger computation graphs.

### Add+Multiply
A common fused operation in ML and linear algebra, where an elementwise addition is immediately followed by multiplication, often used for bias and scaling in neural network layers.

---

## 7. Linear Algebra and ML Operations

> ### GEMM (General Matrix Multiply)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### General Matrix Multiply (GEMM)
```

> A core operation in linear algebra and deep learning, computing C = αAB + βC for matrices A, B, and C. Efficient GEMM implementations are critical for high-performance ML workloads. Core operation C = αA×B + βC, fundamental to deep learning and scientific computing. Optimized by matrix cores for high performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Core matrix operation in linear algebra and deep learning. A GEMM is defined as C = αAB + βC for matrices A, B, and C. 
```

I think we need a concept document about GEMMs (also Tiles and Pipelines).

> ### "Vanilla" GEMM (Naive GEMM) Kernel

Reviewer: Vanilla is actually a very complex flavour and isn't basic at all! :)

Is this the VGEMM that is referred to in Grouped GEMM?

Author: Is this the VGEMM that is referred to in Grouped GEMM? yes

The **vanilla GEMM** is the simplest form of GEMM in CK. It:
- Takes input matrices **A** and **B**
- Multiplies them to produce output matrix **C**

This is the **baseline** or **building block** GEMM that all other complex versions expand upon.

### Grouped GEMM (GGEMMs)

> A kernel which calls multiple VGEMMs and each call may be with different input shape. Each input shape problem first finds its corresponding kernel and then data is mapped to the work-group (blocks) of that kernel. This is done with the help of kArgs structure in code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A kernel which calls multiple VGEMMs. Each call can have a different input shape. Each input shape problem first finds its corresponding kernel and then data is mapped to the work-group (blocks) of that kernel. 
```

### Batched GEMM

> A kernel which calls VGEMMs with different "batches" of data. All batches have the same input shape. At the beginning, inputs (work to be done) are mapped to the various work-groups (blocks) of the kernel. This is done by calculating memory offsets in the input. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A kernel which calls VGEMMs with different "batches" of data. All batches have the same input shape. 
```

### Split-K GEMM
A parallelization strategy that partitions the reduction dimension (K) across multiple compute units, increasing parallelism for large matrix multiplications.

### Matrix-Vector Multiplication
See [GEMV](#gemv).

### GEMV
(Matrix-Vector Multiplication) The operation of multiplying a matrix by a vector, producing another vector. GEMV is a core linear algebra primitive, widely used in neural networks and scientific computing.

> 

Reviewer: Why is Matrix-Vector Multiplication and GEMV split if they're the same thing?

Author: I removed the split

### Inner Product

> Also known as the dot product, it computes the sum of elementwise products of two vectors, yielding a scalar. Inner products are fundamental to similarity measures and neural computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also known as the dot product, it computes the sum of elementwise products of two vectors, yielding a scalar.
```

Inner products are fundamental to a lot of things. :)

### Outer Product
The result of multiplying a column vector by a row vector, producing a matrix. Outer products are used in rank-1 updates and some ML algorithms.

### Norm
A function that measures the magnitude of a vector or matrix, such as L2 (Euclidean) or L1 norm. Norms are used in regularization, normalization, and optimization.

---

## 8. Testing, Build, and Infrastructure

### Regression Test
Tests that are part of CK's ctest suite and explicitly take more than 30s to finish on gfx942.

### Smoke Test
Tests that are part of CK's ctest suite and take less than or equal to 30 seconds to finish on gfx942.

### Benchmark
Performance tests measuring kernel, model, or library throughput and latency under various conditions.

> 

Reviewer: I really don't think this section is needed. I'm a tech writer and I know what these are :)

Author: removed

---

## 9. Low-Level Instructions and Optimizations

> ### XDL Instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### eXtensible Data Language (XDL) Instructions
```

eXtensible Data Language (XDL) instructions are a set of specialized, low-level instructions used to optimize data movement, memory access, and layout in high-performance computing, GPU programming, and deep learning tasks.

---

## 10. Miscellaneous

### HIP
AMD's Heterogeneous-Computing Interface for Portability, a C++ runtime API and programming language that enables developers to create portable applications for AMD and NVIDIA GPUs. HIP provides a familiar CUDA-like programming model while maintaining compatibility across different GPU architectures.

### CUDA
NVIDIA's Compute Unified Device Architecture, a parallel computing platform and programming model for NVIDIA GPUs. CUDA provides a C++ extension for writing GPU kernels and managing GPU resources.

> 

Reviewer: If we're keeping these, we should add ROCm as well.
